updated and added detail to test execution readme (#1350)
microsoft/WinUI-Gallery: UITests/README.md

# UI Tests with WinAppDriver

This UI Test repository of collection of WinAppDriver-based test scenarios that cover basic interactions with WinUI 3 controls. Note: the [Universal Windows Platform controls](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/controls-and-patterns/) reference can be used, as the WinUI 3 controls are very similar to the UWP controls.

The test scenarios are written to test the controls in the Xaml Controls Gallery app. The procedure below outlines the steps needed to build, deploy, and stage the Xaml Controls Gallery and WinAppDriver to run the UI Tests. These manual steps simulate what azure-pipelines.yml does in pipeline test runs.

## Build and install Xaml Controls Gallery

1. Generate the test signing certificate:

```shell
    PS> .\build\GenerateTestPfx.ps1
```

1. Build and publish the Xaml Controls Gallery from the command line, e.g.:

```shell
    dotnet.exe publish WinUIGallery\WinUIGallery.sln /p:AppxPackageDir=AppxPackages\ /p:platform=x64 /p:PublishProfile=./WinUIGallery/Properties/PublishProfiles/win10-x64.pubxml
```

> 1. Locate the Xaml Controls Gallery package output folder from above and deploy for testing:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Locate the WinUI 3's Gallery package output folder from above and deploy for testing:
```

```shell
    PS> .\WinUIGallery\AppxPackages\WinUIGallery.Desktop_Test\Install.ps1
```

## Install and execute WinAppDriver

1. Download and install the latest version of WinAppDriver from [here](https://github.com/microsoft/WinAppDriver/releases)

1. Run WinAppDriver (required for running tests on cmdline or in VS):

```shell
    C:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Application Driver>WinAppDriver.exe
```

## Build and run/debug Tests

1. Build UITests:

```shell
    >msbuild UITests\UITests.sln
```

1. Run test cases built above on command line:

```shell
    vstest.console.exe D:\git\WinUI-Gallery\UITests\bin\x64\Debug\net7.0\UITests.dll
```

1. Debug test cases in Visual Studio
   * Open `UITests.sln` in Visual Studio
   * Select **Test** > **Windows** > **Test Explorer**
   * Select **Run All** on the test pane or through menu **Test** > **Run** > **All Tests**

   Once the project is successfully built, you can use the **TestExplorer** to pick and choose the test scenario(s) to run/debug

## Test output

In either scenario above (cmdline or VS), if the tests run successfully, you should see:

* WinAppDriver console spew indicating successful launch of the test app

> * The Xaml Controls Gallery launch and run with automated UI interactions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The WinUI 3 Gallery launch and run with automated UI interactions
```

* vstest.console.exe spew (if cmdline) showing test case status

## Adding/Updating Test Scenarios

Please follow the guidelines below to maintain test reliability and reduce test execution time:

1. Provide a complete set of interactions (if applicable) for each new control
1. Aim for simple and reliable scenario using the least amount of test steps

> 1. Reuse existing application session when possible to reduce unnecessary application re-launching

Reviewer: Not sure if this still applies since it would be quite an effort to not reuse the existing application session.

# UI Tests with WinAppDriver

> This UI Test repository of collection of WinAppDriver-based test scenarios that cover basic interactions with WinUI 3 controls. Note: the [Universal Windows Platform controls](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/controls-and-patterns/) reference can be used, as the WinUI 3 controls are very similar to the UWP controls.

Reviewer: I think this sentence is not making much sense 😅

The test scenarios are written to test the controls in the WinUI 3 Gallery app. The procedure below outlines the steps needed to build and deploy WinUI 3 Gallery and WinAppDriver to run the UI Tests. These steps mirror what azure-pipelines.yml does in pipeline runs.

## Deploy WinUI 3 Gallery

> The easiest way to deploy WinUI 3 Gallery for unit test execution is to simply build WinUIGallery\WinUIGallery.sln and F5 deploy it from within Visual Studio.  Alternatively, the following commands can be used for automation.

Reviewer: Maybe "[...] to deply *the* WinUI 3 Gallery"?

1. Generate the test signing certificate:

```shell
    PS> .\build\GenerateTestPfx.ps1
```

1. Build and publish the WinUI 3 Gallery from the command line, e.g.:

```shell
    dotnet.exe publish WinUIGallery\WinUIGallery.sln /p:AppxPackageDir=AppxPackages\ /p:platform=x64 /p:PublishProfile=./WinUIGallery/Properties/PublishProfiles/win10-x64.pubxml
```

1. Locate the WinUI 3 Gallery package output folder from above and deploy for testing:

```shell
    PS> .\WinUIGallery\AppxPackages\WinUIGallery.Desktop_Test\Install.ps1
```

## Run WinAppDriver

> The test runner (vstest.console.exe and VS Test Explorer) should automatically launch WinAppDriver. Alternatively, it can be launched manually to observe diagnostic output as follows.

Reviewer: Should it be "[...] as follows *:*"

1. Download and install the latest version of WinAppDriver from [here](https://github.com/microsoft/WinAppDriver/releases)

1. Run WinAppDriver:

```shell

>     C:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Application Driver>WinAppDriver.exe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    C:\Program Files (x86)\Windows Application Driver\WinAppDriver.exe
```

```

## Build and run/debug Tests

The easiest way to run/debug the UI tests is with Visual Studio, as follows:

   * Open `UITests\UITests.sln` in Visual Studio
   * Select **Test** > **Windows** > **Test Explorer**
   * Select **Run All** on the test pane or through menu **Test** > **Run** > **All Tests**

>    Once the project is successfully built, you can use the **Test Explorer** to choose  test scenarios to run/debug

Reviewer: Intentional indentation?

Alternatively, the following commands can be used for automation:

1. Build UITests:

```shell

>     >msbuild UITests\UITests.sln

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    msbuild UITests\UITests.sln
```

Reviewer: Also is it worth pointing out that msbuild is only available in the Developer Prompt and not usually available when opening a terminal, even is VS is installed? Running `dotnet build UITests\UITests.sln` should work as alternative.

Author: excellent

```

1. Run test cases built above on command line:

```shell

>     vstest.console.exe D:\git\WinUI-Gallery\UITests\bin\x64\Debug\net7.0\UITests.dll

Reviewer: Same as above (and the path is probably also not intentional). Running `dotnet test .\UITests\UITests.csproj` also runs the test and also allows you to skip having to build the project beforehand.

Author: thanks

# UI Tests with WinAppDriver

The UI Test repository is a collection of WinAppDriver-based test scenarios that cover basic interactions with WinUI 3 controls. Note: the [Universal Windows Platform controls](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/controls-and-patterns/) reference can be used, as the WinUI 3 controls are very similar to the UWP controls.

The test scenarios are written to test the controls in the WinUI 3 Gallery app. The procedure below outlines the steps needed to build and deploy WinUI 3 Gallery and WinAppDriver to run the UI Tests. These steps mirror what azure-pipelines.yml does in pipeline runs.

## Deploy WinUI 3 Gallery

The easiest way to deploy the WinUI 3 Gallery for unit test execution is to simply build WinUIGallery\WinUIGallery.sln and F5 deploy it from within Visual Studio.  Alternatively, the following commands can be used for automation.

1. Generate the test signing certificate:

```shell
    PS> .\build\GenerateTestPfx.ps1
```

1. Build and publish the WinUI 3 Gallery from the command line, e.g.:

```shell

>     dotnet.exe publish WinUIGallery\WinUIGallery.sln /p:AppxPackageDir=AppxPackages\ /p:platform=x64 /p:PublishProfile=./WinUIGallery/Properties/PublishProfiles/win10-x64.pubxml

Reviewer: Should this also start with `>` like the other shell examples?
